---
slug: 'advent-of-code-2015-01'
title: 'Not Quite Lisp'
description: 'AoC 2015 with Rust - Day 1'
pubDate: "2023-07-15"
draft: false
tags: ['advent-of-code', 'advent-of-code-2015', 'rust']
---

[Link to problem](https://adventofcode.com/2015/day/1)

[Source of the final solution](https://github.com/Ozencb/aoc/tree/main/aoc-2015-01)

[Other posts in the series](/?tag=advent-of-code)

## Part 1

Santa wants to deliver presents in an apartment building but for floor directions, all he got is a set of parentheses. `(` means one floor up, `)` means one floor down. `)())())` results in `-3`, and `))((((()` results in `2`.

Piece of cake. I can increment or decrement a counter as I iterate through the set of these characters accordingly.

I already have a whopping 15 minutes of Rust experience under my belt, so I at least know that one of the most proper ways to install Rust and its friends (Cargo) is to use `rustup`. 

I make sure that my system now recognizes Rust by running `rustc -V`, which should print out the version number.

Alright, that's done. I will now search a very broad term about the language to find some simple examples and hopefully get a glimpse about some of its usage, like declaring variables or defining functions. This method usually works for me with C flavoured languages since I already know few of them.

Simply searching for `rustlang example` offers me the [official Rust documentation](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn) as the first result, which has some good learning material, so I bookmark it because it will probably be my go to place for Rust. I check the [Hello World!](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/hello.html) section under [Rust by Example](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/), and it has part of what I am looking for. A function declaration. It looks like this:

```rust
fn main(){
    println!("Hello World!");
}
```

As the document suggests, I can go ahead and create a file with `.rs` extension, feed it to the compiler by calling `rustc main.rs`, and then run the executable that's been spewed out by the compiler to see a "Hello World!" message on the terminal.

Sounds uneventful, so I am not even gonna bother with this step and start with the AoC puzzle instead.

First, I create a new directory called `aoc`, which will hold separate folders for each puzzle, and initialize this directory with `git` as I also intend to publish it on GitHub. I then add a `.gitignore` file with some basic Rust project templates that I found online, and add a `README.md` file, which will be useful later on to write some stuff about the projects themselves, and push everything to [this repo](https://github.com/Ozencb/aoc). I can return back to Rust.

I remember some stuff about `Cargo`, which is supposed to be THE package manager for everything Rust, and I remember that it was useful for initializing Rust projects. Through a simple search, I find `cargo init` command, and it can be executed like this to create a project: `cargo init <project-name>`.

I wanted to categorize all my solutions under folders with `eventyear-day` naming schema but Cargo did not like that idea. Running `cargo init 2015-01` resulted in an error that says package names cannot start with digits, so I resort to `cargo init aoc-2015-01`. This command should create a directory, under which a `Cargo.toml` file and a `src` directory with some simple Rust code exist. 

[This page](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html) says that `Cargo.toml` is a *manifest* file, which contains some additional information, some *metadata* about the package itself like package name (`aoc-2015-01` for this case), its version, list of dependencies if there are any, etc. We don't have much use of this thing for now.

I now try to figure out how to run the project itself, but I don't want to do it the way I described above because it requires two commands to be run: compilation and execution. I am used to incrementally changing the code and running it frequenstly to see where I am headed, so I want to either run the whole thing with one command or, even better, run it in a watch/hot reload mode. I find out that hot reloading is possible through some third party packages, which I am not willing to go into yet. Maybe Cargo can do it with a single command? Yes it can. I find that running `cargo run` in any Rust package compiles and runs the executable. Running this command in our new working directory, `aoc-2015-01`, should print out some messages from the compiler itself and then our very own print message:

```
Compiling aoc-2015-01 v0.1.0 (/home/oz/dev/aoc/aoc-2015-01)
Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.21s
Running `target/debug/aoc-2015-01`
Hello, world!
```

Our development environment is finally ready to start working on the puzzle itself.

### Solution for Part 1

Santa's instructions will be a set of characters, a string, so I have to somehow feed this into the Rust for it to work on it. I can get a user input but I haven't even declared a simple variable yet, so I don't want to get ahead of myself. Instead, I will simply paste the input into the code in good old fashion. It is enough for now.

I head to [Primitives](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/primitives.html) section, hoping that it would contain some information about declaring strings, and it shows me a whole plethora of ways to declare variables. 

It seems they can be declared with the `let` keyword, and unlike JavaScript `let`s, there are immutable; they can only be assigned with values only once. In order to make a variable mutable, we define them as `let mut`. Rust is a statically-typed language so each variable also has a type. The documentation tells me that they can be annotated like `let a_number: i32` or they can be *inferred*. Type inference simply means that variables are assigned with a type by looking at the value that it takes. So, if I skip the type annotation and simply give the variable a value like so `let a_number = 25`, Rust compiler will look at the value `25` and decide that it is suitable for `a_number` variable to be an *integer*, and give it a default type of `i32`, a 32 byte integer. Nice. 

This particular page does not show an example of string declaration but simply using quotes should do it, as we have seen with our "Hello World!" example.

So I try declaring a string and printing it out like so:

```rust
fn main() {
    let text = "oi";
    println!(text);
}
```

To my surprise, this did not work. 

```
   Compiling aoc-2015-01 v0.1.0 (/home/oz/dev/aoc/aoc-2015-01)
error: format argument must be a string literal
 --> src/main.rs:3:14
  |
3 |     println!(text);
  |              ^^^^
  |
help: you might be missing a string literal to format with
  |
3 |     println!("{}", text);
  |              +++++

error: could not compile `aoc-2015-01` (bin "aoc-2015-01") due to previous error
```

I was about to rush to the search engine again to find examples of printing out variables but look at that error message! It provides everything we need to know about the issue. I guess `println` only works with string literals so I try what the compiler suggests and, surely, it works.

```rust
fn main() {
    let text = "oi";
    println!("{}", text);
}

//oi
```

This much knowledge is enough to declare a string variable for giving the puzzle input, declaring another variable as a counter, and printing out the result at the end. Now we need to do the actual thing.

We need to iterate over the input string; check each character, from the beginning until the end, and make a decision about moving the counter up or down.

```rust
fn main() {
    let instructions = "))((((()";
    let mut currentFloor = 0;

    println!("{}", currentFloor);
}
```

This is the base setup for our puzzle. I gave it some simple instructions to see if it ultimately works and succesfully prints `2`.

I search `rust iterate over string`, and find a [StackOverflow post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/22118221/how-do-you-iterate-over-a-string-by-character), which shows some methods and warnings about looping through each character of a string.

The method that I will use is `string.chars()`, which apparently returns an iterator (something that can be looped through), and with a `for` loop, I can check each character in the string and act upon it. The question also includes some warnings about Unicode characters, which can resolve to multiple characters (ex: `a̐` becomes `['a', '\u{310}']`), but since our input will only consist of parantheses, we don't have to take any measures against this issue.

I apply the method and check to see if I can print each character:

```rust
fn main() {
    let instructions = "))((((()";
    let mut currentFloor = 0;

    for char in instructions.chars() {
        println!("{}", char);
    }

    println!("{}", currentFloor);
}
```

and it does.

Now comes the final piece of the puzzle. We need to check if the character we are currently working on tells us to move up or down. Since our input only has different characters, a simple if/else check should be enough. Specifics of this can be found in [Flow of Control](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/flow_control.html) section of the doc.

For branching, the doc suggests a syntax like so:

```rust
if condition {
   // do stuff
}
```

and for comparisons, we can use all kinds of operators like `<`, `>=`, `==`, and logical operators like `&&`, `||` etc.

With the final piece placed, our code looks like this:

```rust
fn main() {
    let instructions = "))((((()";
    let mut currentFloor = 0;

    for char in instructions.chars() {
        if char == '(' {
            currentFloor = currentFloor + 1;
        } else {
            currentFloor = currentFloor - 1;
        }
    }

    println!("{}", currentFloor);
}
```

and surely, it prints out `2` as we planned.

One minor issue I faced when comparing the character to an opening paranthesis was, characters are expected to be surrounded by single quotes, not double quotes but I tried the latter first and the compiler kindly warned me and steered me into the right direction:

```
error[E0308]: mismatched types
 --> src/main.rs:6:20
  |
6 |         if char == "(" {
  |            ----    ^^^ expected `char`, found `&str`
  |            |
  |            expected because this is `char`
  |
help: if you meant to write a `char` literal, use single quotes
  |
6 |         if char == '(' {
  |                    ~~~

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0308`.
```

Now is the time for taking an input from AoC and pasting it into the `instructions` variable, and run the code, hoping that it works as expected.

AoC gave me a very long string that resolved to `280`, and pasting this number into the solution box and sending it gave me this message:

```
Your puzzle answer was 280.

The first half of this puzzle is complete! It provides one gold star: *
```

Nice. On to part two!

P.S: At this point, I also realized that the compiler warned me about using camel case when naming the `currentFloor` variable, so I will keep that in mind for later changes.


## Part 2

The second part of the puzzle wants me to find the position of the first character that causes Santa to enter the basement (floor -1).

As our `currentFloor` value fluctuates around, it can become greater or lower than 0. We want to detect the exact point in the `instructions` string where it satisfies the `currentFloor < 0` condition, and print out the index of that character.

Does not seem like a huge problem since we can expand our code easily to do this. We just need to add an additonal if check after incrementing/decrementing our `currentFloor` to see if it reached `-1` yet.

```rust
fn main() {
    let instructions = "))((((()";
    let mut currentFloor = 0;

    for char in instructions.chars() {
        if char == '(' {
            currentFloor = currentFloor + 1;
        } else {
            currentFloor = currentFloor - 1;
        }

        if currentFloor < 0 {
            // print out the index            
        }
    }

    println!("{}", currentFloor);
}
```

Now, how do I get the current iteration of our for loop? Searching for `rust for loop index` guided me to [this post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/66288515/how-do-i-get-the-index-of-the-current-element-in-a-for-loop-in-rust), which handily shows an additional method that can be called from an iterator (we have one of those), called `enumerate()`. `chars()` only returns an iterator that carries the actual values while adding `enumerate()` to it also gives us the index, in addition to the actual value. So, in each iteration, we will have two values that we can work with: the index, and the character itself, respectively. 

```rust
fn main() {
    let instructions = "))((((()";
    let mut currentFloor = 0;

    for (idx, char) in instructions.chars().enumerate() {
        if char == '(' {
            currentFloor = currentFloor + 1;
        } else {
            currentFloor = currentFloor - 1;
        }

        if currentFloor < 0 {
           println!("{}", idx); 
        }
    }

    println!("{}", currentFloor);
}
```

Put together, it looks like this.

Now, this theoretically works, but not exactly the way we want it. We want to find out the FIRST time Santa reaches the basement floor, but this prints out every instance he does. We can still find the first value in our terminal that's been printed out, and take it as the first instance's index, then take the last printed out line as our solution for the first part of the puzzle, but we can do better then this. We have to keep track if he has ever reached to the basement level, and stop checking for `currentFloor < 0` condition, so it only prints once.

We can utilize an additional boolean variable, which can hold either `true` or `false` values, and name it something like `hasReachedBasement`.

```rust
let hasReachedBasement = false;
```

Since he starts on floor `0`, he hasn't reached the basement yet, so the initial value of this flag is `false`. Rust also infers its type as `boolean` because we initialized it with a boolean value, `false`.

We can now use this variable to see if he has reached the basement, and when he actually does, we can update its value with `true`. At this point, it is wise to revise our variable with a `mut` keyword since it's going to be updated, so it has to be mutable.

```rust
let mut hasReachedBasement = false;
```

We should make sure that this variable lives outside our loop, otherwise, it would get redefined in each iteration, effectively resetting it back to `false`.

```rust
fn main() {
    let instructions = "))((((()";
    let mut currentFloor = 0;
    let mut hasReachedBasement = false;

    for (idx, char) in instructions.chars().enumerate() {
        if char == '(' {
            currentFloor = currentFloor + 1;
        } else {
            currentFloor = currentFloor - 1;
        }

        if currentFloor < 0 {
           println!("{}", idx); 
        }
    }

    println!("{}", currentFloor);
}
```

Now, we add use this variable to add an additional check to our basement logic:

```rust
fn main() {
    let instructions = "))((((()";
    let mut currentFloor = 0;
    let mut hasReachedBasement = false;

    for (idx, char) in instructions.chars().enumerate() {
        if char == '(' {
            currentFloor = currentFloor + 1;
        } else {
            currentFloor = currentFloor - 1;
        }

        if !hasReachedBasement && currentFloor < 0 {
           println!("{}", idx); 
           hasReachedBasement = true;
        }
    }

    println!("{}", currentFloor);
}
```

By adding `!` (negation or NOT operator), we effectively say "if not reached basement" in our condition. And once we make sure to update it to `true` on our first visit, it will no longer satisfy the entirety of the "hasReachedBasement must be false and current floor is lower than 0" condition.

I fed the input again to the instructions and ran the code to get a result, which was false. It was false because, in programming, indices start from number `0`, while we need the index as a human would understand it: starting from `1`. Simply adding `1` to our index should solve it.


```rust
fn main() {
    let instructions = "))((((()";
    let mut currentFloor = 0;
    let mut hasReachedBasement = false;

    for (idx, char) in instructions.chars().enumerate() {
        if char == '(' {
            currentFloor = currentFloor + 1;
        } else {
            currentFloor = currentFloor - 1;
        }

        if !hasReachedBasement && currentFloor < 0 {
           println!("{}", idx + 1); 
           hasReachedBasement = true;
        }
    }

    println!("{}", currentFloor);
}
```

And it did! Part 2 of our puzzle is now complete and we get two stars.

#### Retrospective

The first blog post in the series turned out to be a lot longer than I wanted, and I found myself to be explaining basic programming concepts unintentionally, mostly because I am new to writing blog posts. I initially planned this series to be a "log", rather than long explanations, but here we are...

I decided to post this blog as is, but going forward, I will try to keep it as concise as possible. Let's see how it goes.